IMPORTANCE OF MANUFACTURING

Manufacturing sector is considered the backbone of development in general and economic development in particular mainly because– • Manufacturing industries not only help in modernising agriculture, which forms the backbone of our economy, they also reduce the heavy dependence of people on agricultural income by providing them jobs in secondary and tertiary sectors. • Industrial development is a precondition for eradication of unemployment and poverty from our country. This was the main philosophy behind public sector industries and joint sector ventures in India. It was also aimed at bringing down regional disparities by establishing industries in tribal and backward areas. • Export of manufactured goods expands trade and commerce, and brings in much needed foreign exchange. • Countries that transform their raw materials into a wide variety of f inished goods of higher value are prosperous. India’s prosperity lies in increasing and diversifying its manufacturing industries as quickly as possible. Agriculture and industry are not exclusive of each other. They move hand in hand.  For instance, the agro-industries in India have given a major boost to agriculture by raising its productivity. They depend on the latter for raw materials and sell their products such as irrigation pumps, fertilisers, insecticides, pesticides, plastic and PVC pipes, machines and tools, etc. to the farmers. Thus, development and competitiveness of On the occassion of Diwali, Harish went to a market with his parents. They purchased shoes and clothes for him. His mother purchased utensils, sugar , tea and diyas (earthen lamps). Harish observed that the shops in the market were flooded with items for sale. He wondered how so many items could be made in such large quantities. His father explained that shoes, clothes, sugar etc. are manufactured by machines in large industries, some utensils are manufactured in small industries, while items like diyas are made by individual artisans in household industry. Do you have some ideas about these industries?

59MANUFACTURING  I NDUSTRIES

Classification of Industries List the various manufactured products you use in your daily life such as – transistors, electric bulbs, vegetable oil, cement, glassware, petrol, matches, scooters, automobiles, medicines and so on. If we classify the various industries based on a particular criterion then we would be able to understand their manufacturing better.  Industries may be classified as follows: On the basis of source of raw materials used: • Agro based: cotton, woollen, jute, silk textile, rubber and sugar , tea, coffee, edible oil. • Mineral based: iron and steel, cement, aluminium, machine tools, petrochemicals. According to their main role: • Basic or key industries are those which supply their products as raw materials to manufacture other goods e.g. iron and steel and copper smelting, aluminum smelting. • Consumer industries that produce goods for direct use by consumers – sugar , toothpaste, paper , sewing machines, fans etc. On the basis of capital investment: • A small scale industry is defined with reference to the maximum investment allowed on the assets of a unit. This limit has changed over a period of time. At present the maximum investment allowed is rupees one crore. On the basis of ownership: • Public sector , owned and operated by government agencies – BHEL, SAIL etc. • Private sector industries owned and operated by individuals or a group of individuals –TISCO , Bajaj Auto Ltd., Dabur Industries. • Joint sector industries which are jointly run by the state and individuals or a group of individuals. Oil India Ltd. (OIL) is jointly owned by public and private sector. • Cooperative sector industries are owned and operated by the producers or suppliers of raw materials, workers or both.  They pool in the resources and share the profits or losses proportionately. Such examples are the sugar industry in Maharashtra, the coir industry in Kerala. Based on the bulk and weight of raw material and finished goods: • Heavy industries such as iron and steel • Light industries that use light raw materials and produce light goods such as electrical goods industries. Classify the following into two groups on the basis of bulk and weight of raw material and finished goods . (i) Oil (vi) Sewing Machines (ii) Knitting needles (vii) Shipbuilding (iii) Brassware (viii) Electric Bulbs (iv) Fuse wires (ix) Paint brushes (v) Watches (x) Automobiles Agro-based Industries Cotton, jute, silk, woollen textiles, sugar and edible oil, etc. industries are  based on agricultural raw materials. manufacturing industry has not only assisted agriculturists in increasing their production but also made the production processes very efficient. In the present day world of globalisation, our industry needs to be more efficient and competitive. Self-sufficiency alone is not enough. Our manufactured goods must be at par in quality with those in the international market. Only then, will we be able to compete in the international market.

CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II