TRANSPORT

Roadways India has second largest road networks in the world, aggregating to about 62.16 lakh km (2020–21). In India, roadways have preceded railways. They still have an edge over railways in view of the ease with which they can be built

CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II

and maintained. The growing importance of road transport vis-à-vis rail transport is rooted in the following reasons; (a) construction cost of roads is much lower than that of railway lines, (b) roads can traverse comparatively more dissected and undulating topography, (c) roads can negotiate higher gradients of slopes and as such can traverse mountains such as the Himalayas, (d) road transport is economical in transportation o f few persons and relatively smaller amount of goods over short distances, (e) it also pr ovides door - to-door service, thus the cost of loading and unloading is much lower , (f) r oad transport is also used as a feeder to other modes of transport such as they provide a link between railway stations, air and sea ports. In India, roads are classified in the following six classes a ccording to their capacity. Look at the map of the National Highways and find out about the significant role played by these roads. • Golden Quadrilateral Super Highways: The government has launched a major road development project linking Delhi- Kolkata-Chennai-Mumbai and Delhi by six-lane Super Highways. The North- South corridors linking Srinagar (Jammu & Kashmir) and Kanniyakumari (T amil Nadu), and East-W est Corridor connecting Silchar (Assam) and Porbander (Gujarat) ar e part of this pr oject. The major objective of these Super Highways is to reduce the time and distance between the mega cities of India. These highway projects are being implemented by the National Highway Authority of India (NHAI). • National Highways:  National Highways link extr eme parts of the country. These are the primary road systems. A number of major National Highways run in North- South and East-West directions. • State Highways:  Roads linking a state capital with different district headquarters are known as State Highways. • District Roads:  These roads connect the district headquarters with other places of the district. • Other Roads: Rural roads, which link rural areas and villages with towns, are classified under this category. These r oads received special impetus under the Pradhan Mantri Grameen Sadak Yojana. Under this scheme special provisions are made so that every village in the country is linked to a major town in the country by an all season motorable road. • Border Roads:  Apart from these, Border Roads Organisation a Government of India undertaking constructs and maintains roads in the bordering areas of the country. This organisation was established in 1960 for the development of the roads of strategic importance in the northern and north-eastern border areas. These roads have improved accessibility in areas of difficult terrain and have helped in the economic development of these area. Fig.7.2:  Ahmedabad- Vadodara Expressway Collect information of National Highway numbers (old and new) from the website morth.nic.in/national-highway-details. The historical Sher -Shah Suri Mar g between Delhi and Amritsar is known by which National Highway ?

73LIFELINES OF N ATIONAL E CONOMY