CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT

Given the abundance and renewability of water, it is dif ficult to imagine that we may suffer from water scar city. The moment we speak of water shortages, we immediately associate it with regions having low rainfall or those that ar e dr ought pr one. W e instantaneously visualise the deserts of Rajasthan and women balancing many ‘matkas’ (earthen pots) used for collecting and storing water and travelling long distances to get water. True, the availability of water resources varies over space and time, mainly due to the variations in seasonal and annual precipitation, but water scarcity in

CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II

consequent greater demands for water , and unequal access to it. A large population requires more water not only for domestic use but also to produce more food. Hence, to facilitate higher food-grain production, water resources are being over-exploited to expand irrigated areas for dry-season agriculture. Irrigated agriculture is the largest consumer of water. Now it is needed to revolutionise the agriculture through developing drought resistant crops and dry farming techniques. You may have seen in many television advertisements that most farmers have theirFig. 3.1:  Water Scarcity most cases is caused by over -exploitation, excessive use and unequal access to water among dif ferent social gr oups. Where is then water scarcity likely to occur? As you have read in the hydrological cycle, freshwater can be obtained directly from pr ecipitation, sur face run of f and groundwater. Is it possible that an area or region may have ample water resources but is still facing water scarcity? Many of our cities are such examples. Thus, water scarcity may be an outcome of large and growing population and Water, Water Everywhere, Not a Drop to Drink: After a heavy downpour , a boy collects drinking water in Kolkata. Life in the city and its adjacent districts was paralysed as incessant overnight rain, meaning a record 180 mm, flooded vast area and disrupted traffic. A Kashmiri earthquake survivor carries water in the snow in a devastated village .

WATER R ESOURCES