of Himalayas, these soils experience denudation and are acidic with low humus content.  The soils found in the lower parts of the valleys particularly on the river terraces and alluvial fans are fertile. Soil Erosion and Soil Conservation The denudation of the soil cover and subsequent washing down is described as soil erosion. The processes of soil formation and erosion, go on simultaneously and generally there is a balance between the two. Sometimes, this balance is disturbed due to human activities like defor estation, over -grazing, construction and mining etc., while natural forces like wind, glacier and water lead to soil erosion. The running water cuts through the clayey soils and makes deep channels as gullies. The land becomes unfit for cultivation and is known as bad land . In the Chambal basin such lands are called ravines. Sometimes water flows as a sheet over large areas down a slope. In such cases the top Fig. 1.11:  Gully Erosion soil is washed away. This is known as sheet erosion. W ind blows loose soil of f flat or sloping land known as wind erosion. Soil erosion is also caused due to defective methods of farming. Ploughing in a wrong way i.e. up and down the slope form channels for the quick flow of water leading to soil erosion. Ploughing along the contour lines can decelerate the flow of water down the slopes. This is called contour ploughing. Steps can be cut out on the slopes making terraces. Terrace cultivation r estricts erosion. Western and central Himalayas have well developed terrace farming. Large fields can be divided into strips. Strips of grass are left to grow between the crops. This breaks up the force of the wind. This method is known as strip cropping. Planting lines of trees to create shelter also works in a similar way. Rows of such trees are called shelter belts. These shelter belts have contributed significantly to the stabilisation of sand dunes and in stabilising the desert in western India. Fig. 1.10:  Soil Erosion

RESOURCES AND D EVELOPMENT

EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions. (i) Which one of the following is the main cause of land degradation in Punjab? (a) Intensive cultivation (c) Over irrigation (b) Deforestation (d) Overgrazing (ii) In which one of the following states is terrace cultivation practised? (a) Punjab (c) Haryana (b) Plains of Uttar Pradesh (d) Uttarakhand (iii) In which of the following states black soil is predominantly found? (a) Uttar Pradesh (c) Rajasthan (b) Maharashtra (d) Jharkhand 2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words. (i) Name three states having black soil and the crop which is mainly grown in it. (ii) What type of soil is found in the river deltas of the eastern coast? Give three main features of this type of soil. (iii) What steps can be taken to control soil erosion in the hilly areas? 3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words. (i) Explain land use pattern in India and why has the land under forest not increased much since 1960-61? (ii) How have technical and economic development led to mor e consumption of resources?

PROJECT/ACTIVITY