climate all through the year. Frequent showers evenly distributed over the year ensure continuous growth of tender leaves. T ea is a labour-intensive industry. It requires abundant, cheap and skilled labour. Tea is processed within the tea garden to restore its freshness. Major tea- producing states are Assam, hills of Darjeeling and Jalpaiguri districts, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu and Kerala. Apart from these, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, M eghalaya, A ndhra Pradesh and Tripura are also tea-producing states in the country. In 2020 India was the second largest producer of tea after China. C CC CCof ofof ofoffe fefe fefee: e:e: e:e: Indian coffee is known in the world for its go od quality . The A rabica variety initially brought from Yemen is produced in the country. This variety is in great demand all over the world. Initially its cultivation was introduced on the Baba Budan Hills and even today its cultivation is confined to the Nilgiri in Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu. H HH HHorticulture Corticulture Corticulture Corticulture Corticulture C rops: rops:rops: rops:rops:      In 2020 , I ndia was the second largest producer of fruits and vegetables in the world after China. India is a producer of tropical as well as temperate fruits. Mangoes of Maharashtra, A ndhra Pradesh, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, oranges of Nagpur and Cherrapunjee (Meghalaya), bananas of Kerala, Mizoram, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu, lichi and guava of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar , pineapples of Meghalaya, grapes of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Maharashtra, apples, pears, apricots and walnuts of Jammu and Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh are in great demand the world over. Fig. 4.10: Fig. 4.10:Fig. 4.10: Fig. 4.10:Fig. 4.10:  Tea Cultivation Fig. 4.11: Fig. 4.11:Fig. 4.11: Fig. 4.11:Fig. 4.11:  Tea-leaves Harvesting Source: Source:Source: Source:Source: Pocket book of agricultural statistics, 2022, Govt. of India. Directorate of Economics and Statistics. Fig. 4.12: Fig. 4.12:Fig. 4.12: Fig. 4.12:Fig. 4.12:  Apricots, apple and pomegranate F FF FFig. 4.13: ig. 4.13:ig. 4.13: ig. 4.13:ig. 4.13:  Cultivation of vegetables – peas, cauliflower, tomato and brinjal

CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II

India is an important producer of pea , cauliflower, onion, cabbage, tomato, brinjal and potato. N NN NNon-F on-Fon-Fon-Fon-F o oo oood C od Cod C od Cod C rops ropsrops ropsrops Rubber: Rubber:Rubber: Rubber:Rubber: It is an equatorial crop, but under special conditions, it is also grown in tropical and sub-tropical areas. It requires moist and humid climate with rainfall of more than 200 cm. and temperature above 25°C. Rubber is an important industrial raw material. It is mainly grown in Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Andaman and Nicobar islands and Garo hills of Meghalaya. Maharashtra,  G ujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. J JJ JJute: ute:ute: ute:ute: It is known as the golden fibre. J ute grows well on well-drained fertile soils in the flood plains where soils are renewed every year. High temperature is required during the time of growth. West Bengal, Bihar, Assam, Odisha and Meghalaya are the major jute producing states. It is used in making gunny bags, mats, ropes, yarn, carpets and other artefacts. T TT TTechnological and Iechnological and Iechnological and Iechnological and Iechnological and I nstitutional Reformsnstitutional Reformsnstitutional Reformsnstitutional Reformsnstitutional Reforms It was mentioned in the previous pages that agriculture has been practised in India for thousands of years. Sustained uses of land without compatible techno-institutional changes have hindered the pace of agricultural development. Inspite of development of sources of irrigation most of the farmers in large parts of the country still depend upon monsoon and natural fertility in order to carry on their agriculture. For a growing population, this poses a serious challenge. Agriculture which provides livelihood for more than 60 per cent of its population, needs some serious technical and institutional reforms. Thus, collectivisation, consolidation of holdings, cooperation and abolition of zamindari, etc. were given priority to bring about institutional reforms in the country after Independence. ‘Land reform’ was the main focus of our First Five Year Plan. The right of inheritance had already led to fragmentation of land holdings necessitating consolidation of holdings. The laws of land reforms were enacted but the implementation was lacking or lukewarm. The Government of India embarked upon introducing agricultural reforms to improve Indian agriculture in the 1960s and 1970s. The Green Revolution based on the use of package technology and the White Revolution (Operation Flood) were some of the strategies initiated to improve the lot of Indian agriculture. But, this too led to the concentration of development in few selected areas. Therefore, in the 1980s and 1990s, a comprehensive land development programme was initiated, which included both institutional and technical Fig. 4.14: Fig. 4.14:Fig. 4.14: Fig. 4.14:Fig. 4.14:   Cotton Cultivation Fibre Fibre Fibre Fibre Fibre CCC CCrops:rops:rops: rops:rops: Cotton, jute, hemp and natural silk are the four major fibre crops grown in India. The first three are derived from the crops grown in the soil, the latter is obtained from cocoons of the silkworms fed on green leaves specially mulberry. Rearing of silk worms for the production of silk fibre is known as sericulturesericulturesericulturesericulturesericulture. Cotton: Cotton:Cotton: Cotton:Cotton:  India is believed to be the original home of the cotton plant. Cotton is one of the main raw materials for cotton textile industry. India is second largest producer of cotton after China. Cotton grows well in drier parts of the black cotton soil of the Deccan plateau. It requires high temperature, light rainfall or irrigation, 210 frost-free days and bright sun-shine for its growth. It is a kharif crop and requires 6 to 8 months to mature. Major cotton-producing states are– List the items which are made of rubber and are used by us.

39AGRICULTURE

Fig. 4.15:  Modern technological equipments used in agriculture reforms. Provision for crop insurance against drought, flood, cyclone, fire and disease, establishment of Grameen banks, cooperative societies and banks for providing loan facilities to the farmers at lower rates of interest were some important steps in this direction. Kisan Credit Card (KCC), Personal Accident Insurance Scheme (PAIS) are some other schemes introduced by the Government of  India for the benefit of the farmers. Moreover, special weather bulletins and agricultural programmes for farmers were introduced on the radio and television. The government also announces minimum support price, remunerative and procurement prices for important crops to check the exploitation of farmers by speculators and middlemen. Bhoodan – Gramdan Mahatma Gandhi declared Vinoba Bhave as his spiritual heir . He also participated in Satyagraha as one of the foremost satyagrahis. He was one of the votaries of Gandhi’s concept of gram swarajya. After Gandhiji’s martyrdom, Vinoba Bhave undertook padyatra to spread Gandhiji’s message covered almost the entire country. Once, when he was delivering a lecture at Pochampally in T elangana, some poor landless villagers demanded some land for their economic well-being. Vinoba Bhave could not promise it to them immediately but assured them to talk to the Government of India regarding provision of land for them if they undertook cooperative farming. Suddenly, Shri R am Chandra R eddy stood up and offered 80 acres of land to be distributed among 80 land-less villagers. This act was known as ‘Bhoodan’. Later he travelled and introduced his ideas widely all over India. Some zamindars, owners of many villages offered to distribute some villages among the landless. It was known as Gramdan. However, many land-owners chose to provide some part of their land to the poor farmers due to the fear of land ceiling act. This Bhoodan- Gramdan movement initiated by Vinoba Bhave is also known as the Blood-less Revolution. Collect information about agriculture, horticulture, agricultural schemes, etc. from Farmers’ P ortal  website https://farmer . gov.in/FarmerHome.aspx. Discuss about the benefits of the information available on the portal.