Fig. 4.15:  Modern technological equipments used in agriculture reforms. Provision for crop insurance against drought, flood, cyclone, fire and disease, establishment of Grameen banks, cooperative societies and banks for providing loan facilities to the farmers at lower rates of interest were some important steps in this direction. Kisan Credit Card (KCC), Personal Accident Insurance Scheme (PAIS) are some other schemes introduced by the Government of  India for the benefit of the farmers. Moreover, special weather bulletins and agricultural programmes for farmers were introduced on the radio and television. The government also announces minimum support price, remunerative and procurement prices for important crops to check the exploitation of farmers by speculators and middlemen. Bhoodan – Gramdan Mahatma Gandhi declared Vinoba Bhave as his spiritual heir . He also participated in Satyagraha as one of the foremost satyagrahis. He was one of the votaries of Gandhi’s concept of gram swarajya. After Gandhiji’s martyrdom, Vinoba Bhave undertook padyatra to spread Gandhiji’s message covered almost the entire country. Once, when he was delivering a lecture at Pochampally in T elangana, some poor landless villagers demanded some land for their economic well-being. Vinoba Bhave could not promise it to them immediately but assured them to talk to the Government of India regarding provision of land for them if they undertook cooperative farming. Suddenly, Shri R am Chandra R eddy stood up and offered 80 acres of land to be distributed among 80 land-less villagers. This act was known as ‘Bhoodan’. Later he travelled and introduced his ideas widely all over India. Some zamindars, owners of many villages offered to distribute some villages among the landless. It was known as Gramdan. However, many land-owners chose to provide some part of their land to the poor farmers due to the fear of land ceiling act. This Bhoodan- Gramdan movement initiated by Vinoba Bhave is also known as the Blood-less Revolution. Collect information about agriculture, horticulture, agricultural schemes, etc. from Farmers’ P ortal  website https://farmer . gov.in/FarmerHome.aspx. Discuss about the benefits of the information available on the portal.

CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II

EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions. (i) Which one of the following describes a system of agriculture where a single crop is grown on a large area? (a) Shifting Agricultur e (b) Plantation Agricultur e (c) Horticultur e (d) Intensive Agriculture (ii) Which one of the following is a rabi crop? (a) Rice (b) Gram (c) Millets (d) Cotton (iii) Which one of the following is a leguminous crop? (a) Pulses (b) Jawar (c) Millets (d) Sesamum 2. Answer the following questions in 30 words. (i) Name one important beverage crop and specify the geographical conditions required for its growth. (ii) Name one staple crop of India and the regions where it is produced. (iii) Enlist the various institutional reform programmes introduced by the government in the interest of farmers. 3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words. (i) Suggest the initiative taken by the government to ensure the increase in agricultural production. (ii) Describe the geographical conditions required for the growth of rice.

PROJECT WORK