I IIIINTEGRATEDNTEGRATEDNTEGRATEDNTEGRATEDNTEGRATED W  W W W WATER ATERATER ATERATER R  R R R RESOURCESESOURCESESOURCESESOURCESESOURCES M  M M M MANAGEMENTANAGEMENTANAGEMENTANAGEMENTANAGEMENT

But, how do we conserve and manage water? Archaeological and historical records show that from ancient times we have been constructing sophisticated hydraulic structures like dams built of stone rubble, reservoirs or lakes, embankments and canals for irrigation. Not surprisingly, we have continued this tradition in modern India by building dams in most of our river basins. available to meet the needs of the people, but, the area still suffers from water scarcity. This scarcity may be due to bad quality of water. Lately, there has been a growing concern that even if there is ample water to meet the needs of the people, much of it may be polluted by domestic and industrial wastes, chemicals, pesticides and fertilisers used in agriculture, thus, making it hazardous for human use. Government of India has accorded highest priority to improve the quality of life and enhance ease of living of people especially those living in rual areas by announcing the Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM). The Goal of JJM is to enable every rural household get assured supply of potable piped water at a service level of 55 litres per capita per day regularly on long-term basis by ensuring functionality of the tap water connections. (Source: Economic Survey 2020–21, p.357) You may have already realised that the need of the hour is to conserve and manage our water resources, to safeguard ourselves from health hazards, to ensure food security, continuation of our livelihoods and productive activities and also to prevent degradation of our natural ecosystems. Over exploitation and mismanagement of water resources will impoverish this resource and cause ecological crisis that may have profound impact on our lives. From your everyday experiences, write a short proposal on how you can conserve water. So far we have focused on the quantitative aspects of water scarcity. Now, let us consider another situation where water is sufficiently Hydraulic Structures in Ancient India • In the first century B.C., Sringaverapura near Allahabad had sophisticated water Atal Bhujal Yojana (Atal Jal) is being implemented in 8220 water stressed Gram Panchayats of 229 administrative blocks/ talukas in 80 districts of seven states, viz. Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh. The selected States account for about 37 per cent of the total number of water— stressed (over-exploited, critical and semi-critical) blocks in India. One of the key aspects of Atal Jal is to bring in behavioural changes in the community, from the prevailing attitude of consumption to conservation and smart water management. Source:Source:Source: Source:Source: Annual Report, Ministry of Jal Shakti, Government of India 2022–23

CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II

What are dams and how do they help us in conserving and managing water? Dams were traditionally built to impound rivers and rainwater that could be used later to irrigate agricultural fields. Today, dams are built not just for irrigation but for electricity generation, water supply for domestic and industrial uses, flood control, recreation, inland navigation and fish breeding. Hence, dams are now referred to as multi-purpose projects where the many uses of the impounded water are integrated with one another. For example, in the Sutluj-Beas river basin, the Bhakra – Nangal project water is being used both for hydel power production and irrigation. Similarly, the Hirakud project in the Mahanadi basin integrates conservation of water with flood control. Multi-purpose projects, launched after Independence with their integrated water resources management approach, were thought of as the vehicle that would lead the nation to development and progress, overcoming the harvesting system channelling the flood water of the river Ganga. • During the time of Chandragupta Maurya, dams, lakes and irrigation systems were extensively built. • Evidences of sophisticated irrigation works have also been found in Kalinga, (Odisha), Nagarjunakonda (Andhra Pradesh), Bennur (Karnataka), Kolhapur (Maharashtra), etc. • In the 11th Century, Bhopal Lake, one of the largest artificial lakes of its time was built. • In the 13th–14th Century, the tank in Hauz Khas, Delhi was constructed by Allauddin Khilji (Khalji) for supplying water to Siri Fort area. Source: Dying Wisdom, CSE, 1997. Find out more about any one traditional method of building dams and irrigation works. Fig. 3.2: Hirakud Dam A dam is a barrier across flowing water that obstructs, directs or retards the flow, often creating a reservoir, lake or impoundment. “Dam” refers to the reservoir rather than the structure. Most dams have a section called a spillway or weir over which or through which it is intended that water will flow either intermittently or continuously . Dams are classified according to structure, intended purpose or height. Based on structure and the materials used, dams are classified as timber dams, embankment dams or masonry dams, with several subtypes. According to the height, dams can be categorised as large dams and major dams or alternatively as low dams, medium height dams and high dams. handicap of its colonial past. Jawaharlal Nehru proudly proclaimed the dams as the ‘temples of modern India’; the reason being that it would integrate development of agriculture and the village economy with rapid industrialisation and growth of the urban economy. We have sown the crops in Asar We will bring Bhadu in Bhadra Floods have swollen the Damodar The sailing boats cannot sail Oh! Damodar, we fall at your feet Reduce the floods a little Bhadu will come a year later Let the boats sail on your surface (This popular Bhadu song in the Damodar valley region narrates the troubles faced by people owing to the flooding of Damodar river known as the river of sorrow.)

WATER R ESOURCES