73LIFELINES OF N ATIONAL E CONOMY

India:  National Highways

CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II

Roads can also be classified on the basis of the type of material used for their construction such as metalled and unmetalled roads. Metalled roads may be made of cement, concrete or even bitumen of coal, therefore, these are all weather roads. Unmetalled roads go out of use in the rainy season. Railways Railwa ys are the principal mode of transportation for freight and passengers in India. Railways also make it possible for people to conduct multifarious activities like business, sightseeing, pilgrimage along with transportation of goods over longer distances. Apart from an important means of transport the Indian Railways have been a great integrating force for more than 150 years. Railways in India bind the economic life of the country as well as accelerate the development of the industry and agriculture. The Indian Railway is now reorganised into 17 zones. The World’s longest Highway tunnel-Atal Tunnel (9.02 Km) has been built by Border Road Organisation. This tunnel connects Manali to Lahul-Spiti valley throughout the year. Earlier the valley was cut off for about 6 months each year owing to heavy snowfall. The tunnel is buit with ultra-modern specifications in the Pir Panjal range of Himalayas at an altitude of 3000 metres from the Mean Sea Level (MSL). Source: http://www.bro.gov.in/pagefimg. asp?imid=144,And PIBdelhi03October2020 Fig. 7.3:  Hilly Tracts Fig. 7.4:  Traffic on north-eastern border road (Arunachal Pradesh) The distribution pattern of the Railway network in the country has been largely influenced by physiographic, economic and administrative factors.  The northern plains with their vast level land, high population density and rich agricultural resources provided the most favourable condition for their growth.  However, a large number of rivers requiring construction of bridges across their wide beds posed some obstacles.  In the hilly terrains of the peninsular region, railway tracts are laid through low hills, gaps or tunnels. The Himalayan mountainous regions too are unfavourable for the construction of railway lines due to high relief, sparse population and lack of economic opportunities. Likewise, it was difficult to lay railway lines on the sandy plain of western Rajasthan, swamps of Gujarat, forested tracks of Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Jharkhand.  The contiguous stretch of Sahyadri could be crossed The Indian Railways is the largest public sector undertaking in the country. The first train steamed off from Mumbai to Thane in 1853, covering a distance of 34 km. Find out the current Railway zones and their headquarters. Also locate the headquarters of Railway zones on the map of India.

75LIFELINES OF N ATIONAL E CONOMY