CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II

Act was implemented in 1972, with various provisions for pr otecting habitats. An all- India list of protected species was also published. The thrust of the programme was towards protecting the remaining population of certain endangered species by banning hunting, giving legal protection to their habitats, and restricting trade in wildlife. Subsequently, central and many state governments established national parks and wildlife sanctuaries about which you have already studied. The central government also announced several projects for protecting specific animals, which were gravely threatened, including the tiger , the one- hor ned r hinocer os, the Kashmir stag or hangul , three types of crocodiles – fresh water crocodile, saltwater crocodile and the Gharial, the Asiatic lion, and others. Most recently, the Indian elephant, black buck (chinkara), the great Indian bustard (godawan) and the snow leopard, etc. have been given full or partial legal protection against hunting and trade throughout India. Fig. 2.1 Tribal girls using bamboo saplings in a nursery at Mukhali near Silent V alley Tribal women selling minor for est produce Leaf litter collection by women folk Project Tiger Tiger is one of the key wildlife species in the faunal web. In 1973, the authorities realised that the tiger population had dwindled to 1,827 from an estimated 55,000 at the turn of the century. The major threats to tiger population are numerous, such as poaching for trade, shrinking habitat, depletion of prey base species, growing human population, etc. The trade of tiger skins and the use of their bones in traditional medicines, especially in the Asian countries left the tiger population on the verge of extinction. Since India and Nepal provide habitat to about two-thirds of the surviving tiger population in the world, these two nations became prime targets for poaching and illegal trading. “Project Tiger ”, one of the well- publicised wildlife campaigns in the world, was launched in 1973.  Tiger conservation has been viewed not only as an effort to save an endangered species, but with

15FOREST AND W ILDLIFE R ESOURCES

much of its forest and wildlife resources are either owned or managed by the government through the For est Department or other government departments. These are classified under the following categories. (i) Reserved Forests: More than half of the total forest land has been declared reserved forests . Reserved forests are regarded as the most valuable as far as the conservation of forest and wildlife resources are concerned. (ii) Protected Forests: Almost one-third of the total forest area is protected forest, as declared by the Forest Department. This forest land are protected from any further depletion. (iii) Unclassed Forests:  These are other forests and wastelands belonging to both government and private individuals and communities. Reserved and protected forests are also referred to as permanent forest estates maintained for the purpose of producing timber and other forest produce, and for protective reasons. Madhya Pradesh has the largest area under permanent forests, constituting 75 per cent of its total forest area. Jammu and Kashmir , Andhra Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Kerala, T amil Nadu, W est Bengal, and Maharashtra have large percentages of reserved forests of its total forest area whereas Bihar , Haryana, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Odisha and Rajasthan have a bulk of it under protected forests. All North- Collect more information on the wildlife sanctuaries and national parks of India and cite their locations on the map of India. Fig. 2.2:  Rhino and deer in Kaziranga National Park equal importance as a means of preserving biotypes of sizeable magnitude. Corbett National Park in Uttara khand, Sunderbans National Park in West Bengal, Bandhavgarh National Park in Madhya Pradesh, Sariska Wildlife Sanctuary in Rajasthan, Manas Tiger Reserve in Assam and Periyar Tiger Reserve in Kerala are some of the tiger reserves of India. The conservation projects are now focusing on biodiversity rather than on a few of its components. There is now a more intensive search for different conservation measures. Increasingly, even insects are beginning to find a place in conservation planning. In the notification under Wildlife Act of 1980 and 1986, several hundred butterflies, moths, beetles, and one dragonfly have been added to the list of protected species. In 1991, for the first time plants were also added to the list, starting with six species. Types and Distribution of Forest and Wildlife Resources Even if we want to conserve our vast forest and wildlife resources, it is rather difficult to manage, control and regulate them. In India,

CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II