India:  Distribution of Coal, Oil and Natural Gas Collect information about cross country natural gas pipelines laid by GAIL (India) under “One Nation One Grid”.

CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II

Jharkhand). Jharia, Raniganj, Bokaro are important coalfields. The Godavari, Mahanadi, Son and W ardha valleys also contain coal deposits. Tertiary coals occur in the north easter n states of Meghalaya, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland. Remember coal is a bulky material, which loses weight on use as it is reduced to ash. Hence, heavy industries and thermal power stations are located on or near the coalfields. Petroleum Petroleum or mineral oil is the next major energy source in India after coal. It provides fuel for heat and lighting, lubricants for machinery and raw materials for a number of manufacturing industries. Petroleum refineries act as a “nodal industry” for synthetic textile, fertiliser and numerous chemical industries. Most of the petroleum occurrences in India are associated with anticlines and fault traps in the rock formations of the tertiary age. In regions of folding, anticlines or domes, it occurs where oil is trapped in the crest of the upfold. The oil bearing layer is a porous limestone or sandstone through which oil may flow. The oil is pr evented fr om rising or sinking by intervening non-porous layers. Petroleum is also found in fault traps between porous and non-porous rocks. Gas, being lighter  usually occurs above the oil. Mumbai High, Gujarat and Assam ar e major petroleum production areas in India. From the map locate the 3 major of f shore fields of wester n India. Ankeleshwar is the most important field of Gujarat. Assam is the oldest oil producing state of India. Digboi, Naharkatiya and Moran-Hugrijan ar e the important oil fields in the state. Natural Gas Natural Gas is found with petroleum deposits and is released when crude oil is brought to the surface. It can be used as a domestic and industrial fuel. It is used as fuel in power sector to generate electricity, for heating purpose in industries, as raw material in chemical, petrochemical and fertilizer industries, as transport fuel and as cooking fuel. With the expansion of gas infrastructure and local city gas distribution (COD) networks, natural gas is also emerging as a preferred transport fuel (CNG) and cooking fuel (PNG) at homes. India’s major gas reserves are found in the Mumbai High and allied fields along the west coast which are supplemented by finds in the Cambay basin. Along the East Coast, new reserves of natural gas have been discovered in the Krishna-Godavari basin. The first 1,700 km long Hazira-V ijaipur- Jagdishpur (HVJ) cross country gas pipeline, constructed by GAIL (India), linked Mumbai High and Bassein gas fields with various fertilizer, power and industrial complexes in western and northen India. This artery provided impetus to Indian gas market development. Overall, India’s gas infrastructure has expanded over ten times from 1,700 km to 18,500 km of cross-country pipelines and is expected to soon reach over 34, 000 km as Gas Grid by linking all gas sources and consuming markets across the country including North Eastern states. Electricity Electricity has such a wide range of applications in today’s world that, its percapita consumption is considered as an index of development. Electricity is generated mainly in two  ways: by running water which drives hydro turbines to generate hydro electricity; and by burning other fuels such as coal, petroleum and natural gas to drive turbines to produce thermal power. Once generated the electricity is exactly the same. Hydro electricity is generated by fast flowing water, which is a r enewable resource. India has a number of multi-purpose projects like the Bhakra Nangal, Damodar V alley corporation, the Kopili Hydel Project etc. producing hydroelectric power. Thermal electricity is generated by using coal, petroleum and natural gas. The thermal power stations use non-renewable fossil fuels for generating electricity. Name some river valley projects and write the names of the dams built on these rivers.

53MINERALS AND E NERGY R ESOURCES

India:  Distribution of Nuclear and Thermal Power Plants Rawat Bhata