India:  Distribution of Iron Ore, Manganese, Bauxite and Mica

47MINERALS AND E NERGY R ESOURCES

Copper CopperCopper CopperCopper India is critically deficient in the reserve and production of copper. Being malleable, ductile and a good conductor, copper is mainly used in electrical cables, electronics  and chemical Fig. 5.4: Fig. 5.4:Fig. 5.4: Fig. 5.4:Fig. 5.4:  Copper mines at Malanjkhand Fig. 5.5: Fig. 5.5:Fig. 5.5: Fig. 5.5:Fig. 5.5:  Production of Bauxite showing state-wise share in per cent, 2018–19 industries. The Balaghat mines in Madhya Pradesh, Khetri mines in Rajasthan and Singhbhum district of Jharkhand are leading producers of copper. Bauxite BauxiteBauxite BauxiteBauxite Though, several ores contain aluminium, it is from bauxite, a clay-like substance that alumina and later aluminium is obtained. Bauxite deposits are formed by the decomposition of a wide variety of rocks rich in aluminium silicates. Aluminium is an important metal because it combines the strength of metals such as iron, with extreme lightness and also with good conductivity and great malleability. India’s bauxite deposits are mainly found in the Amarkantak plateau, Maikal hills and the plateau region of Bilaspur-Katni. Odisha was the largest bauxite producing state in India in 2018-19. Panchpatmali deposits in Koraput district are the most important bauxite deposits in the state. Dig a little deeper: Locate the mines of Bauxite on the physical map of India. Fig.5.6: Fig.5.6:Fig.5.6: Fig.5.6:Fig.5.6:  Bauxite Mine Others 1% Odisha 65% Jharkhand 10% Gujarat 9% Chhattisgarh 6% Maharashtra 6% Madhya Pradesh 3%

CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II

Non-Metallic Minerals Mica is a mineral made up of a series of plates or leaves. It splits easily into thin sheets. These sheets can be so thin that a thousand can be layered into a mica sheet of a few centimeters high. Mica can be clear, black, green, red yellow or brown. Due to its excellent di-electric strength, low power loss factor , insulating properties and resistance to high voltage, mica is one of the most indispensable minerals used in electric and electronic industries. Mica deposits are found in the northern edge of the Chota Nagpur plateau. Koder ma Gaya – Hazaribagh belt of Jharkhand is the leading producer. In Rajasthan, the major mica producing area is ar ound Ajmer . Nellor e mica belt of Andhra Pradesh is also an important producer in the country. Rock Minerals Limestone is found in association with rocks composed of calcium carbonates or calcium and magnesium carbonates. It is found in sedimentary rocks of most geological formations. Limestone is the basic raw material for the cement industry and essential for smelting iron ore in the blast furnace. Dig a little deeper: Study the maps to explain why Chota Nagpur is a storehouse of minerals. Hazards of Mining Have you ever wondered about the efforts the miners make in making life comfortable for you? What are the impacts of mining on the health of the miners and the environment? The dust and noxious fumes inhaled by miners make them vulnerable to pulmonary diseases. The risk of collapsing mine roofs, inundation and fires in coalmines are a constant threat to miners. The water sources in the region get contaminated due to mining. Dumping of waste and slurry leads to degradation of land, soil, and increase in stream and river pollution. Fig. 5.8:  Air pollution due to generation of dust in mining areas After the discovery of aluminium Emperor Napoleon III wore buttons and hooks on his clothes made of aluminium and served food to his more illustrious guests in aluminium utensils and the less honourable ones were served in gold and silver utensils. Thirty years after this incident aluminium bowls were most common with the beggars in Paris. Fig. 5.7:  Production of Limestone showing state-wise share in per cent, 2018–19