75LIFELINES OF N ATIONAL E CONOMY

• From oil field in upper Assam to Kanpur (Uttar Pradesh), via Guwahati, Barauni and Prayagraj. It has branches from Barauni to Haldia, via Rajbandh, Rajbandh to Maurigram and Guwahati to Siliguri. • From Salaya in Gujarat to Jalandhar in Punjab, via Viramgam, Mathura, Delhi and Sonipat. It has branches to connect Koyali (near V adodara, Gujarat) Chakshu and other places. • The first 1,700 km long Hazira-V ijaipur- Jagdishpur (HVJ) cross country gas pipeline, linked Mumbai High and Bassein gas fields with various ferilizer, power and industrial complexes in western and northern India. Overall, India’s gas pipeline infrastructure has expanded from 1,700 km to 18,500 km of cross-country pipelines. Waterways Since the ancient period, India was one of the seafaring countries.  Its seamen sailed far and near, thus, carry ing and spr eading Indian commerce and cultur e. Waterways ar e the cheapest means of transport. They are most suitable for carrying heavy and bulky goods. It is a fuel-efficient and environment friendly mode of transport. India has inland navigation waterways of 14,500 km in length. In order to create wide waterways network and to promote inland water transport in the country as an economical environment friendly supplementary mode of transport to rail and road, 111 inland waterways  (including 5 National Waterways declared earlier ) wer e declared as National Waterways (NWs) by the National Waterways Act, 2016. (Source: Annual Report, Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways, Government of India, 2022-23). only through gaps or passes (Ghats). In recent times, the development of the Konkan railway along the west coast has facilitated the movement of passengers and goods in this most important economic region of India. It has also faced a number of problem such as sinking of track in some stretches and landslides. Today, the railways have become more important in our national economy than all other means of transport put together. However, rail transport suffers from certain problems as well. Many passengers travel without tickets. Thefts and damaging of railway property has not yet stopped completely.  People stop the trains, pull the chain unnecessarily and this causes heavy damage to the railway. Think over it, how we can help our railway in running as per the scheduled time? Pipelines Pipeline transport network is a new arrival on the transportation map of India.  In the past, these were used to transport water to cities and industries. Now, these are used for transporting crude oil, petroleum products and natural gas from oil and natural gas fields to refineries, fertilizer factories and big thermal power plants. Solids can also be transported through a pipeline when converted into slurry. The far inland locations of refineries like Barauni, Mathura, Panipat and gas based fertilizer plants could be thought of only because of pipelines. Initial cost of laying pipelines is high but subsequent running costs are minimal.  It rules out trans-shipment losses or delays. There are three important networks of pipeline transportation in the country. Source: Railway Yearbook 2019–20, Ministry of Railways, Gover nment of India. Website: www.indianrailways.gov.in Table 7.1: India: Railway Track The Indian Railway network runs on multiple gauge operations extending over 67,956 km. Gauge in metres Route (Km) Broad Gauge (1.676) 63950 Metre Gauge (1.000) 2,402 Narrow Gauge (0.762 and 0.610) 1,604 Total 67,956

CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II

Activity Railway line has been extended from Banihal to Baramula in the K ashmir Valley. Locate these two towns on the map of India.

77LIFELINES OF N ATIONAL E CONOMY