77LIFELINES OF N ATIONAL E CONOMY

Fig. 7.5:  Inland waterways widely used in north-eastern states • The Ganga river between Prayagraj and Haldia (1620 km)-N.W. No.1 • The Brahmaputra river between Sadiya and Dhubri (891 km)-N.W. No.2 • The W est-Coast Canal in Kerala (Kottapurma-Kollam, Udyogamandal and Champakkara canals-205 km) – N.W. No.3 • Specified stretches of Godavari and Krishna rivers along with Kakinada Puducherry stretch of canals (1078 km) – N.W. No.4 • Specified stretches of river Brahmani along with Matai river, delta  channels of Mahanadi and Brahmani rivers and East Coast Canal (588 km) – N.W. No.5 There are some other inland water ways on which substantial transportation takes place. These are Mandavi, Zuari and Cumberjua, Sunderbans, Barak and backwaters of Kerala. Apart from these, India’s trade with foreign countries is carried from the ports located along the coast. 95 per cent of the country’s trade volume (68 per cent in terms of value) is moved by sea. Deendayal Port, is a tidal port. It caters to the convenient handling of exports and imports of highly productive granary and industrial belt stretching across UT of Jammu and Kashmir, and the states of Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Gujarat. Major Sea Ports With a long coastline of 11098.81 km, India is dotted with 12 major and 200 notified non- majors (minor/intermediate) ports. These major ports handle 95 per cent of India’s foreign trade. Deendayal Port (Kandla) in Kuchchh was the first port developed soon after Independence to ease the volume of trade on the Mumbai port, in the wake of loss of Karachi port to Pakistan after the Partition. Moving along the east coast, you would see the extr eme south-easter n port of V .O. Chidambaranar (Tuticorin), in T amil Nadu. This port has a natural harbour and rich hinterland. Thus, it has a flourishing trade handling of a large variety of cargoes to even Fig. 7.6:  Trucks being driven into the vessel at Mumbai port Mumbai is the biggest port with a spacious natural and well-shelter ed harbour . The Jawaharlal Nehru port was planned with a view to decongest the Mumbai port and serve as a hub port for this region. Mormugao port (Goa) is the premier iron ore exporting port of the country. This port accounts for about fifty per cent of India’s iron ore export. New Mangalore port, located in Karnataka caters to the export of iron ore concentrates from Kudremukh mines. Cochin is the extreme south-western port, located at the entrance of a lagoon with a natural harbour. Fig. 7.7:  Tanker discharging crude oil at New Mangalore port

CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II

great ease. Think of the north-eastern part of the country, marked with the presence of big rivers, dissected relief, dense forests and frequent floods and international frontiers, etc. in the absence of air transport. Air travel has made access easier. Pawanhans H elicopters Ltd. provides helicopter services to Oil and Natural Gas Corporation in its off-shore operations, to inaccessible areas and difficult terrains like the north-eastern states and the interior parts of Jammu and K ashmir, H imachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand. our neighbouring countries like Sri L anka, Maldives, etc. and the coastal regions of India. Chennai is one of the oldest artificial ports of the country. It is ranked next to M umbai in terms of the volume of trade and cargo. Vishakhapatnam is the deepest landlocked and well-protected port. This port was, originally, conceived as an outlet for iron ore exports. Paradwip port located in Odisha, specialises in the export of iron ore. Shyama Prasad M ookerje e, Kolkata is an inland riverine port. This port serves a very large and rich hinterland of Ganga- Brahmaputra basin. Being a tidal port, it requires constant dredging of Hoogly. Haldia port was developed as a subsidiary port, in order to relieve growing pressure on the Kolkata port. Fig. 7.9 Fig. 7.9Fig. 7.9 Fig. 7.9Fig. 7.9 A AA AA irways irwaysirways irwaysirways The air travel, today , is the fastest, most comfortable and prestigious mode of Why is air travel prefered in the north-easternWhy is air travel prefered in the north-easternWhy is air travel prefered in the north-easternWhy is air travel prefered in the north-easternWhy is air travel prefered in the north-eastern states? states?states? states?states? Fig. 7.8: Fig. 7.8:Fig. 7.8: Fig. 7.8:Fig. 7.8:  Handling of oversize cargo at V.O. Chidambaranar (Tuticorin) port transport. It can cover very difficult terrains like high mountains, dreary deserts, dense forests and also long oceanic stretches with UDAN (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik) is a first- of-its kind scheme globally, designed to jump-start the regional aviation market. Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) – UDAN was conceived by the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA), Government of India, to promote regional connectivity by making fly affordable for the common citizen. The central idea of the scheme is to encourage airlines to operate flights on regional and remote routes through enabling policies and extending incentives. CommunicationCommunicationCommunicationCommunicationCommunication Ever since humans appeared on the earth, they have used dif ferent means of communication. But, the pace of change, has been rapid in modern times. L ong distance communication is far easier without physical movement of the communicator or receiver. Personal communication and mass communication including television, radio, press, films, etc. are the major means of communication in the country . The I ndian postal network is the largest in the world. It handles parcels as well as personal written communications. Cards and envelopes are considered first-class mail and are airlifted between stations covering both land and air. The second-class mail includes book packets, registered newspapers and periodicals. They are carried by surface mail, covering land and water transport. To facilitate quick delivery of mails in large towns and cities, six mail channels have been introduced recently. They are called Rajdhani Channel, Metro Channel, Green Channel, Business Channel, Bulk Mail Channel and Periodical Channel.

79LIFELINES OF N ATIONAL E CONOMY