geothermal gradient is high, high temperatures are found at shallow depths. Groundwater in such areas absorbs heat from the rocks and becomes hot. It is so hot that when it rises to the earth’s surface, it turns into steam. This steam is used to drive turbines and generate electricity. There are several hundred hot springs in India, which could be used to generate electricity. Two experimental projects have been set up in India to harness geothermal energy. One is located in the Parvati valley near Manikaran in Himachal Pradesh and the other is located in the Puga Valley, Ladakh. Conservation of Energy Resources Energy is a basic requirement for economic development.  Every sector of the national economy – agricultur e, industry, transport, commercial and domestic – needs inputs of energy. The economic development plans implemented since Independence necessarily required increasing amounts of energy to remain operational.  As a result, consumption of energy in all forms has been steadily rising all over the country. In this background, there is an urgent need to develop a sustainable path of energy development. Promotion of energy conservation and increased use of renewable energy sources are the twin planks of sustainable energy. India is presently one of the least energy efficient countries in the world. W e have to adopt a cautious approach for the judicious use of our limited ener gy r esour ces. For example, as concerned citizens we can do our bit by using public transport systems instead of individual vehicles; switching off electricity when not in use, using power-saving devices and using non-conventional sources of energy. After all, “energy saved is energy produced”. manure. Biogas is by far the most ef ficient use of cattle dung. It improves the quality of manure and also prevents the loss of trees and manure due to burning of fuel wood and cow dung cakes.

EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions. (i) Which one of the following minerals is formed by decomposition of rocks, leaving a residual mass of weathered material? (a) coal (b) bauxite (c) gold (d) zinc (ii) Koderma, in Jharkhand is the leading producer of which one of the following minerals? (a) bauxite (b) mica (c) iron ore (d) copper Tidal Energy Oceanic tides can be used to generate electricity. Floodgate dams ar e built across inlets. During high tide water flows into the inlet and gets trapped when the gate is closed. After the tide falls outside the flood gate, the water retained by the floodgate flows back to the sea via a pipe that carries it through a power-generating turbine. In India the Gulf of Khambhat, the Gulf of Kuchchh in Gujarat on the wester n coast and Gangetic delta in Sunderban r egions of West Bengal pr ovide ideal conditions for utilising tidal energy. Geo Thermal Energy Geo thermal energy refers to the heat and electricity produced by using the heat from the interior of the Earth. Geothermal energy exists because, the Earth grows progressively hotter with increasing depth. Where the Fig. 5.12:  Biogas Plant

CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II

(iii) Minerals are deposited and accumulated in the stratas of which of the following rocks? (a) sedimentary rocks (c) igneous rocks (b) metamorphic rocks (d) none of the above (iv) Which one of the following minerals is contained in the Monazite sand? (a) oil (b) uranium (c) thorium (d) coal 2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words. (i) Distinguish between the following in not more than 30 words. (a) ferrous and non-ferrous minerals (b) conventional and non-conventional sources of energy (ii) What is a mineral? (iii) How are minerals formed in igneous and metamorphic rocks? (iv) Why do we need to conserve mineral resources ? 3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words. (i) Describe the distribution of coal in India. (ii) Why do you think that solar energy has a bright future in India?