metres wide. The tankas were part of the well- developed rooftop rainwater harvesting Collect information about flood prone areas of the country

CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II

• Rooftop rainwater is collected using a PVC pipe • Filtered using sand and bricks • Underground pipe takes water to sump for immediate usage • Excess water from the sump is taken to the well • Water from the well recharges the underground • Take water from the well (later) (b) Recharge through Abandoned Dugwell Fig 3.3: Fig 3.3:Fig 3.3: Fig 3.3:Fig 3.3:  Rooftop Rainwater Harvesting The rainwater can be stored in the tankas tankastankas tankastankas  till the next rainfall making it an extremely reliable source of drinking water when all other sources are dried up, particularly in the summers. Rainwater, or palar panipalar panipalar panipalar panipalar pani, as commonly referred to in these parts, is considered the purest form of natural water. Many houses constructed underground rooms adjoining the ‘tanka’ to beat the summer heat  as it would keep the (a) Recharge through Hand Pump system and were built inside the main house or the courtyard. They were connected to the sloping roofs of the houses through a pipe. Rain falling on the rooftops would travel down the pipe and was stored in these underground ‘tankas’. The first spell of rain was usually not collected as this would clean the roofs and the pipes. The rainwater from the subsequent showers was then collected. Fig. 3.4 Fig. 3.4Fig. 3.4 Fig. 3.4Fig. 3.4 A kul leads to a circular village tank, as the above in the Kaza village, from which water is released as and when required. Fig 3.5:  Fig 3.5:  Fig 3.5:  Fig 3.5:  Fig 3.5:  Traditional method of rainwater harvesting

WATER R ESOURCES

Tamil Nadu is the first state in India which has made rooftop rainwater harvesting structure compulsory to all the houses across the state. There are legal provisions to punish the defaulters. Rooftop rainwater harvesting is the most common practice in Shillong, Meghalaya. It is interesting because Cherapunjee and Mawsynram  situated at a distance of 55 km. from Shillong receive the highest rainfall in the world, yet the state capital Shillong faces acute shortage of water. Nearly every household in the city has a rooftop rainwater harvesting structure. Nearly 15-25 per cent of the total water requirement of the household comes from rooftop water harvesting. room cool. Today, in western Rajasthan, sadly the practice of rooftop rainwater harvesting is on the decline as plenty of water is available due to the perennial Indira Gandhi Canal, though some houses still maintain the tankas since they do not like the taste of tap water. Fortunately, in many parts of rural and urban India, rooftop rainwater harvesting is being successfully adapted to store and conserve water. In Gendathur, a remote backward village in Mysuru, Karnataka, villagers have installed, in their household’s rooftop, rainwater harvesting system to meet their water needs. Nearly 200 households have installed this system and the village has earned the rare distinction of being rich in rainwater. See Fig. 3.6 for a better understanding of the rooftop rainwater harvesting system which is adapted here. Gendathur receives an annual precipitation of 1,000 mm, and with 80 per cent of collection efficiency and of about 10 fillings, every house can collect and use about 50,000 litres of water annually. From the 200 houses, the net amount of rainwater harvested annually amounts to 1,00,000 litres. Fig. 3.6 Fig. 3.6Fig. 3.6 Fig. 3.6Fig. 3.6 Rooftop harvesting was common across the towns and villages of the Thar. Rainwater that falls on the sloping roofs of houses is taken through a pipe into an underground tanka (circular holes in the ground). built in the main house or in the courtyard. The picture above shows water being taken from a neighbour’s roof through a long pipe. Here the neighbour’s rooftop has been used for collection of rainwater. The picture shows a hole through which rainwater flows down into an underground tanka. Find out other rainwater harvesting systems existing in and around your locality.