Everything available in our envir onment which can be used to satisfy our needs, provided, it is technologically accessible, economically feasible and culturally acceptable can be termed as ‘Resource’. The process of transformation of things available in our environment involves an inter active relationship between nature, technology and institutions. Human beings interact with nature through technology and create institutions to accelerate their economic development. Do you think that resources are free gifts of nature as is assumed by many? They are not. Resources are a function of human activities. Human beings themselves are essential components of resources. They transform material available in our environment into resources and use them. These resources can be classified in the following way s– (a) On the basis of origin – biotic and abiotic (b) On the basis of exhaustibility – renewable and non-renewable (c) On the basis of ownership – individual, community, national and inter national (d) On the basis of status of development – potential, developed stock and reserves. Can you identify and name the various items used in making life comfortable in our villages and towns. List the items and name the material used in their making. Fig. 1.1:  Interdependent relationship between nature, technology and institutions Fig. 1.2:  Classification of resources

CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II

DEVELOPMENT OF R ESOURCES

Resources are vital for human survival as well as for maintaining the quality of life. It was believed that resources are free gifts of nature. As a result, human beings used them indiscriminately and this has led to the following major problems. • Depletion of resources for satisfying the greed of a few individuals. • Accumulation of resources in few hands, which, in turn, divided the society into two segments i.e. haves  and have nots or rich and poor. • Indiscriminate exploitation of resources has led to global ecological crises such as, global warming, ozone layer depletion, environmental pollution and land degradation. An equitable distribution of resources has become essential for a sustained quality of life and global peace. If the present trend of resource depletion by a few individuals and countries continues, the future of our planet is in danger. Therefore, resource planning is essential for sustainable existence of all forms of life. Sustainable existence is a component of sustainable development. Sustainable development Sustainable economic development means ‘development should take place without damaging the environment, and development in the present should not compromise with the needs of the future generations.’ Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit, 1992 In June 1992, more than 100 heads of states met in Rio de Janeiro in Brazil, for the first International Earth Summit. The Summit was convened for addressing urgent problems of environmental protection and socio- economic development at the global level. The assembled leaders signed the Declaration on Global Climatic Change and Biological Diversity . The Rio Convention endorsed the global Forest Principles and adopted Agenda 21  for achieving Sustainable Development in the 21st century. Agenda 21 It is the declaration signed by world leaders in 1992 at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), which took place at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. It aims at achieving global sustainable development. It is an agenda to combat environmental damage, poverty , disease through global co-operation on common interests, mutual needs and shared responsibilities. One major objective of the Agenda 21 is that every local government should draw its own local Agenda 21.

RESOURCE PLANNING