India:  Distribution of Wheat

CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II

variety of soils and needs manual labour from sowing to harvesting. India is the second largest producer of sugarcane only after Brazil. I t is the main sou rce of sugar , gur (jaggary), khandsari and molasses. The major sugarcane-producing states are Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, A ndhra Pradesh, T elangana, Bihar , Punjab and Haryana. Oil Seeds:Oil Seeds:Oil Seeds:Oil Seeds:Oil Seeds:  In 2020 India was the second largest producer of groundnut in the world after C hina. Dif ferent oil se eds are grown covering approximately 12 per cent of the total cropped area of the country. Main oil-seeds produced in India are groundnut, mustard, coconut, sesamum (til), soyabean, castor seeds, cotton se eds, linseed and sunflower. Most of these are edible and used as cooking mediums. However, some of these are also used as raw material in the production of soap, cosmetics and ointments. Groundnut is a kharif crop and accounts for about half of the major oilseeds produced in the country. Gujarat was the largest producer of groundnut followed by Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu in 2019–20. Linseed and mustard are rabi crops. Sesamum is a kharif crop in north and rabi crop in south India. Castor seed is grown both as rabi and kharif crop. Tea: Tea:Tea: Tea:Tea:  Tea cultivation is an example of plantation agriculture. It is also an important beverage crop introduced in India initially by the British. Today, most of the tea plantations are owned by Indians. The tea plant grows well in tropical and sub-tropical climates endowed with deep and fertile well-drained soil, rich in humus and organic matter. Tea bushes require warm and moist frost-free Fig. 4.9: Fig. 4.9:Fig. 4.9: Fig. 4.9:Fig. 4.9:  Groundnut, sunflower and mustard are ready to be harvested in the field Pulses: Pulses:Pulses: Pulses:Pulses: India is the largest producer as well as the consumer of pulses in the world. These are the major source of protein in a vegetarian diet. Major pulses that are grown in India are tur (arhar), urad, mo ong, masur, peas and gram. Can you distinguish which of these pulses are grown in the kharif season and which are grown in the rabi season? Pulses need less moisture and survive even in dry conditions. Being leguminous crops, all these crops except arhar help in restoring soil fertility by fixing nitrogen from the air . Therefore, these are mostly grown in rotation with other crops. Major pulse producing states in India  are Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and Karnataka. Food Crops other than GrainsFood Crops other than GrainsFood Crops other than GrainsFood Crops other than GrainsFood Crops other than Grains Sugarcane:Sugarcane:Sugarcane:Sugarcane:Sugarcane:  It is a tropical as well as a subtropical crop. It grows well in hot and humid climate with a temperature of 21°C to 27°C and an annual rainfall between 75cm. and 100cm. Irrigation is required in the regions of low rainfall. It can be grown on a Fig. 4.8: Fig. 4.8:Fig. 4.8: Fig. 4.8:Fig. 4.8:  Sugarcane Cultivation

37AGRICULTURE

climate all through the year. Frequent showers evenly distributed over the year ensure continuous growth of tender leaves. T ea is a labour-intensive industry. It requires abundant, cheap and skilled labour. Tea is processed within the tea garden to restore its freshness. Major tea- producing states are Assam, hills of Darjeeling and Jalpaiguri districts, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu and Kerala. Apart from these, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, M eghalaya, A ndhra Pradesh and Tripura are also tea-producing states in the country. In 2020 India was the second largest producer of tea after China. C CC CCof ofof ofoffe fefe fefee: e:e: e:e: Indian coffee is known in the world for its go od quality . The A rabica variety initially brought from Yemen is produced in the country. This variety is in great demand all over the world. Initially its cultivation was introduced on the Baba Budan Hills and even today its cultivation is confined to the Nilgiri in Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu. H HH HHorticulture Corticulture Corticulture Corticulture Corticulture C rops: rops:rops: rops:rops:      In 2020 , I ndia was the second largest producer of fruits and vegetables in the world after China. India is a producer of tropical as well as temperate fruits. Mangoes of Maharashtra, A ndhra Pradesh, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, oranges of Nagpur and Cherrapunjee (Meghalaya), bananas of Kerala, Mizoram, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu, lichi and guava of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar , pineapples of Meghalaya, grapes of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Maharashtra, apples, pears, apricots and walnuts of Jammu and Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh are in great demand the world over. Fig. 4.10: Fig. 4.10:Fig. 4.10: Fig. 4.10:Fig. 4.10:  Tea Cultivation Fig. 4.11: Fig. 4.11:Fig. 4.11: Fig. 4.11:Fig. 4.11:  Tea-leaves Harvesting Source: Source:Source: Source:Source: Pocket book of agricultural statistics, 2022, Govt. of India. Directorate of Economics and Statistics. Fig. 4.12: Fig. 4.12:Fig. 4.12: Fig. 4.12:Fig. 4.12:  Apricots, apple and pomegranate F FF FFig. 4.13: ig. 4.13:ig. 4.13: ig. 4.13:ig. 4.13:  Cultivation of vegetables – peas, cauliflower, tomato and brinjal