79LIFELINES OF N ATIONAL E CONOMY

India:  Major Ports and Some International Airports (Source: Annual Report, 2023–24, Ministry of Ports, Shipping and W aterways, Govt. of India.)

CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II

of India, is one of the largest terrestrial networks in the world. It broadcasts a variety of programmes from entertainment, educational to sports, etc. for people of different age groups. India publishes a large number of newspapers and periodicals annually. They are of dif ferent types depending upon their periodicity. Newspapers ar e published in about 100 languages and dialects. Did you know that the largest number of newspapers published in the country are in Hindi, followed by English and Urdu? India is the largest producer of featur e films in the world. It produces short films; video feature films and video short films. The Central Board of Film Certification is the authority to certify both Indian and foreign films. International Trade The exchange of goods among people, states and countries is referred to as trade. The market is the place where such exchanges take place. T rade between two countries is called international trade. It may take place through sea, air or land routes. While local trade is carried in cities, towns and villages, state level trade is carried between two or more states. Advancement of international trade of a country is an index to its economic prosperity. It is, ther efore, consider ed the economic barometer for a country. As the r esources ar e space bound, no country can survive without international trade. Export and import are the components of trade. The balance of trade of a country is the differ ence between its export and import. When the value of export exceeds the value of imports, it is called a favourable balance of trade. On the contrary, if the value of imports exceeds the value of exports, it is termed as unfavourable balance of trade. India has trade relations with all the major trading blocks and all geographical regions of the world. The commodities exported from India to other countries include gems and jewellery, chemicals and r elated pr oducts, agriculture and allied products, etc. India has one of the largest telecom networks in Asia. Excluding urban places more than two-thirds of the villages in India have already been covered with Subscriber Trunk Dialling (STD) telephone facility. In order to strengthen the flow of information from the grassroot to the higher level, the government has made special provision to extend twenty- four hours STD facility to every village in the country. There is a uniform rate of STD facilities all over India. It has been made possible by integrating the development in space technology with communication technology. Mass communication provides entertainment and creates awareness among people about various national programmes and policies. It includes radio, television, newspapers, magazines, books and films. All India Radio (Akashwani) broadcasts a variety of programmes in national, regional and local languages for various categories of people, spread over dif ferent parts of the country. Doordarshan, the national television channel Digital India is an umbrella programme to prepare India for a knowledge based transformation. The focus of Digital India Programme is on being transformative to realise – IT (Indian Talent) + IT (Information Technology)=IT (India Tomorrow) and is on making technology central to enabling change. Fig.7.10 : Emergency call box on NH-48

81LIFELINES OF N ATIONAL E CONOMY