A B Z O E N M F T I S D L R C

C G N N S Z I O P A X T Y J H

K J G K D T D C S L S E G E W

(i) Natural endowments in the for m of land, water , vegetation and minerals. (ii) A type of  non-renewable resource. (iii) Soil with high water retaining capacity. (iv) Intensively leached soils of the monsoon climate. (v) Plantation  of trees on a large scale to check soil erosion. (vi) The Great Plains of India are made up of these soils. We share this planet with millions of other living beings, starting from micro-organisms and bacteria, lichens to banyan trees, elephants and blue whales. This entire habitat that we live in has immense biodiversity. W e humans along with all living organisms form a complex web of ecological system in which we are only a part and very much dependent on this system for our own existence. For example, the plants, animals and micro-organisms re-create the quality of the air we breathe, the water we drink and the soil that produces our food without which we cannot survive. Forests play a key role in the ecological system as these are also the primary producers on which all other living beings depend. Flora and Fauna in India If you look around, you will be able to find that there are some animals and plants which are unique in your area. In fact, India is one of the world’s richest countries in ter ms of its vast array of biological diversity . This is possibly twice or thrice the number yet to be discover ed. You have alr eady studied in detail about the extent and variety of forest and wildlife r esources in India. Y ou may have realised the importance of these resources in our daily life. These diverse flora and fauna are so  well integrated in our daily life that we take these for granted. But, lately, they ar e under great stress mainy due to insensitivity to our environment. Narak! My Lord, you are the creator of music in the world of Lepchas Oh Narak! My Lord, let me dedicate myself to you Let me gather your music from the springs, the rivers, the mountains, the forests, the insects and the animals Let me gather your music from the sweet breeze and offer it to you Lepcha folk song Biodiversity or Biological Diversity  is immensely rich in wildlife and cultivated species, diverse in form and function but closely integrated in a system through multiple network of interdependencies. Find out stories prevalent in your region which are about the harmonious relationship between human beings and nature. Conservation of Forest and Wildlife in India Conservation in the background of rapid decline in wildlife population and forestry has become essential. But why do we need to conserve our forests and wildlife? Conservation preserves the ecological diversity and our life support systems – water, air and soil. It also preserves the genetic diversity of plants and animals for better growth of species and br eeding. For example, in agricultur e, we are still dependent on traditional crop varieties. Fisheries too are heavily dependent on the maintenance of aquatic biodiversity. In the 1960s and 1970s, conservationists demanded a national wildlife protection programme. The Indian Wildlife (Protection)

CONTEMPORARY I NDIA – II