Document Author : Ashrya Soni 
Page 1 of 1 2
Class IX 
Python Programming Language 
TheoreticalQuestions 

1 . What is Python ? 
Python is a high - level , general - purpose programming language . Its design philosophy emphasizescode readability with the use of significant indentation . 
2 . In which area Python Programming is useful for ?
Python Programming is useful in the area of : 
a . web development ( server - side ) ,
b . software development , 
c . mathematics , 
d . system scripting . 
3 . What can Python do ? 
Python can be used on a server to create web applications . 
a . Python can be used alongside software to create workflows . 
b . Python can connect to database systems . It can also read and modify files . 
c . Python can be used to handle big data and perform complex mathematics . 
d . Python can be used for rapid prototyping , or for production - ready software development . 
4 . Why Python ? 
Python is preferred programming language due to the following reasons : 
a . Easy to learn : It has fewer keywords and simple structure of instructions , so less efforts to 
learn Python . 
Free and open source b . 
c . Portable : A Python program can run on wide variety of hardware platforms . 
d . Extensive library support : Python saves times and effort using the support of extensive 
library . 
As an example , YouTube has been largely written in Python . Google makes extensive use of Python .
NASA uses Python for scientific programming tasks . 
5 . What are the two modes of Python ? 
The two modes of Python are interactive and script mode . 
6 . What is interactive mode . List it ’ s advantages and drawbacks . 
As the name suggests , Interactive mode allows us to interact with OS . When we type Pythonstatement , interpreter displays the result ( s ) immediately . 
Advantages : 
•
• 
Python , in interactive mode , is good enough to learn , experiment or explore . 
Working in interactive mode is convenient for beginners and for testing small pieces of code . 
Drawback : 
• We cannot save the statements and have to retype all the statements once again to re - run them . 
7 . What is script mode . List its advantages and drawbacks . 
In script mode , we type python program in a file and then use interpreter to execute the content ofthe file . Scripts can be saved to disk for future use . Python scripts have the extension . py , meaningthat the filename ends with . py . 

Document Author : Ashrya Soni 
Page 2 of 1 2 

8 . What are variables and how to create the same in Python ? 
Variables – Variables are containers for storing data values . 
Creating Variables – Python has no command for declaring a variable . 
A variable is created the moment you first assign a value to it . Variables do not need to be declaredwith any type and can even change type after they have been set . 
For example : 
x = 5 
y = " John " 
Here x is variable which is assigned a value 5 which is automatically declared as integer as data typeand y is variable which is assigned a value ‘ John ’ which is automatically declared as string data type . 
9 . Discuss Data Types is Python ? 
Python supports a number of data types such as number , string , list , tuple , set and dictionary . We willdiscuss about number and string data type here : 
Number : The following are the two important number data type : 
a . int – int stands for integer which is a positive or a negative number without a decimal point . 
There are three types of integers in Python :
Example : a = 7 ; b = - 9 0 
b . float – float or floating - point number is positive or negative number with a fractional part . 
Example : c = 9 . 7 ; d = - 8 8 . 9 
Strings : Strings in Python are a sequence of characters . These characters are enclosed within singlequotes ( ‘ ) , double quotes ( “ ) or triple quotes ( “ ) . Triple quotes are used when the string valueextends over more than one line . 
Example of strings : 
name = “ Myra ” 
section = ‘ A ’ 
message = ‘ ‘ ‘ A dream does not become reality through magic ; it takes sweat , determination , and hardwork . ~ Colin Powell ’ ’ ’ 
1 0 . What are operators in Python ? 
Operators are special symbols that are used to perform operations on variables and values . Operatorsare used in everyday Mathematics , like + , - , x , ÷ to perform addition , subtraction , multiplication , anddivision of values . Python also has a number of operators that help us perform operations of varioustypes . 
1 1 . What is assignment operator ? 
Assignment operator ( = ) is operator which is used to assign a value to a variable .
For example : 
x = 5 
y = " John " 
1 2 . What are arithmetic operators in Python ? Explain with an example . 
Arithmetic operators are operators used to perform mathematical operation on variables and value .
For example , in 5 + 9 , ‘ + ’ is arithmetic operator performing addition on values 5 and 9 . 
Similarly , in p / q , ‘ / ’ is arithmetic operator performing division on p and q .